docs: Subnets and VMs page rewrite (#1359)
ava-labs/avalanche-docs: docs/learn/avalanche/subnets-overview.md

sidebar_label: Subnets
---

# What Is a Subnet?

A **Subnet** is a sovereign network which defines its own rules regarding its
membership and token economics. It is composed of a dynamic subset of Avalanche
validators working together to achieve consensus on the state of one or more
blockchains. Each blockchain is validated by exactly one Subnet, while a Subnet

> can host many blockchains.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
can validate many blockchains.
```

Avalanche's [Primary Network](avalanche-platform.md) is a special Subnet running three blockchains:

> - The Platform Chain (P-Chain)

Reviewer 2: Link out to the P-Chain, C-Chain and X-Chain details 

- The Platform Chain [(P-Chain)](./avalanche-platform.md#platform-chain-p-chain)
- The Contract Chain [(C-Chain)](./avalanche-platform.md#contract-chain-c-chain)
- The Exchange Chain [(X-Chain)](./avalanche-platform.md#exchange-chain-x-chain)

- The Contract Chain [(C-Chain)](avalanche-platform#contract-chain-c-chain)
- The Exchange Chain [(X-Chain)](avalanche-platform#exchange-chain-x-chain)

![image](/img/subnet-validators.png)

(Image adopted from [this article](https://www.coinbase.com/cloud/discover/dev-foundations/intro-to-avalanche-subnets))

:::info

> Every validator, regardless of Subnet involvement,
> **must** validate the Primary Network.

Reviewer: I think "Subnet involvement" is a bit clunky
```suggestion
Every validator in a Subnet must also validate the Primary Network.
```

:::

## Advantages

### Independent Networks

> - Subnets specify their own execution logic, determine their

Reviewer: I mean, strictly speaking, VMs, not Subnets, do these things

Author: "Subnets use virtual machines to specify their own execution logic"?

own fee regime, maintain their own state, facilitate their own networking, and
provide their own security. 
- Each Subnet's performance is isolated from other Subnets in the ecosystem, so increased usage on
one Subnet won't affect another.
- Subnets can have their own token economics with their own native tokens, fee
markets, and incentives determined by the Subnet deployer. 

> - One Subnet can host multiple blockchains with customized [virtual machines](virtual-machines.md).

Reviewer: Again, I feel like "can validate" is better than "can host" since that's the verbiage used in the past but I'd also be OK with "host."
```suggestion
- One Subnet can host multiple blockchains with customized [virtual machines](virtual-machines.md).
```

> - They don’t share execution thread, storage[^1], or

Reviewer: I'd remove this bullet

networking with any other Subnets, including the Primary Network.

### Native Interoperability

- Avalanche Warp Messaging enables native cross-Subnet communication and allows Virtual Machine (VM)
developers to implement arbitrary communication protocols between any two Subnets.

> <!-- - would love a bullet about native bridges -->

Reviewer 2: Remove this comment if it's not needed and capture it in a github issue if it's something which we want to follow up on in a later PR.

### Accommodate Application-Specific Requirements

_Different blockchain-based applications may require validators to have certain
properties such as large amounts of RAM or CPU power._ 

- A Subnet could require that validators
meet certain [hardware requirements](/nodes/build/run-avalanche-node-manually.md#requirements) so
that the application doesn’t suffer from low performance due to slow validators.

### Launch a Network Designed With Compliance In Mind

_Avalanche’s Subnet architecture makes regulatory compliance manageable. As
mentioned above, a Subnet may require validators to meet a set of requirements._

Some examples of requirements the creators of a Subnet may choose include:

- Validators must be located in a given country
- Validators must pass a KYC/AML checks

> - Validators must hold a certain license

Reviewer: Should we have periods at the end for consistency with other lists?

### Control The Privacy of On-Chain Data

_Subnets are ideal for organizations interested in keeping their information private._

- Institutions conscious of their stakeholders' privacy can create a private Subnet where the
contents of the blockchains would be visible only to a set of pre-approved validators. 
Define this at creation with a [single parameter](/nodes/maintain/subnet-configs.md#private-subnet).

### Validator Sovereignty

_In a heterogeneous network of blockchains, some validators will not want to
validate certain blockchains because they simply have no interest in those
blockchains._
 
- The Subnet model enables validators to concern themselves only with
blockchain networks they choose to participate in. This greatly reduces the computational burden on validators.

## Develop Your Own Subnet

> To get started, check out the tutorials in our [Subnets](http://localhost:3000/subnets/build-first-subnet)

Reviewer 2: This link shouldn't have `localhost` hardcoded.
